In the last lesson,
we described the general
object detection problem
as well as how to
evaluate the performance
of 2G object detectors
using average precision.
This lesson will describe
the steps involved
in performing 2D object
detection using convNets.
Keep in mind that the field
of 2D object detection
is rapidly changing with
new methods emerging everyday.
What we will be describing
is a modern approach
to 2D object detection
using ConvNets,
but without many of
the intricacies that allow state
of the art detectors to eke
out the best possible
performance.
If you find this topic
is exciting as we do,
check out the list of some
of the current top 2D
object detection papers
we've included in
the supplementary material.
In this lesson, you
will learn how to build
a standard single-stage
ConvNet architecture
for 2D object detection using
the network layers we learned
about in module three.
In addition, we will discuss
some common designs that
researchers have
formulated for ConvNets
used for 2D object detection.
Let's begin by reviewing the 2D
object detection problem.
Given an image as an input,
we want to simultaneously
localize all objects
in the scene and determine
which class they belong to.
Let's see how we can perform
this task using a ConvNet.
This figure shows
the basic ConvNet configuration
used for 2D object detection.
We call this configuration a
neural network architecture.
The architecture
takes as an input
an image and a set of
manually crafted prior boxes.
First, the image is processed
using a feature extractor.
Second, a set of fully connected
layers take as an input,
the output of the feature
extractor and provide
a location refinement of
each 2D prior box as well
as a classification.
Finally, non maximum
suppression is performed on
the output of
the fully connected layers
to generate the final detections.
Let's delve deeper into
each of these steps.
We will begin our discussion with
the feature extraction stage.
Feature extractors are
the most computationally
expensive component
of the 2D object detector.
It is typical to have
as much as 90 percent of
the total architectures required
computation used at this stage.
The output of feature
extractors usually has
much lower width and
height than those
of the input image.
However, its depth is usually
two to three orders of
magnitude greater than
that of the input image.
The design of feature extractors
is a very active area of
research with new extractors
emerging on a regular basis.
The most common feature
extractors used
are VGG, ResNet, and Inception.
We will be focusing on
the VGG feature extractor as
our running example throughout
the rest of this lesson.
The VGG feature extractor
is based on the
convolutional layers
of the VGG 16
classification network
proposed by the
Visual Geometry Group
at Oxford University.
It is one of the first
feature extractors to be
proposed for detection and
is quite simple to build.
As with most ConvNets,
the VGG feature
extractor is built by
alternating convolutional
layers and pooling layers.
All convolutional layers are
of size three by three by K,
with a stride of one and
a zero-padding of one,
by which we mean that the padding
of size one is filled with zeros.
All max-pooling layers
are of size two
by two with stride
two and no padding.
These particular hyper
parameters were arrived
at through intensive
experimentation and
have performed extremely
well in a wide range
of problems making VGG and
extremely popular extractor.
Let's see how these layers affect
our output volume shape.
Last week, we derive
the three equations for
the output width, height,
and depth based on
the input volume after it has
been passed through
the convolutional layer.
For the VGG feature extractor,
all convolutions are of
size three by three by K,
with a stride of
one and zero padding of one.
That means the passing
an input volume through any
of the convolutional layers
only changes its depth
to K. On the other hand,
the pooling layers
of the VGG extractor
are two by two with stride
two and no padding.
Repeating the same analysis
using the equations
for the pooling layer,
we noticed that
the max-pooling layers of
VGG extractors reduce the width
and height of
the input volume by two,
while maintaining
the depth constant.
Let's now see how
the VGG extractor
processes an input image.
Given an M by N by
three input image,
we pass it through the first
two convolutional layers of depth
64 followed by
the first pooling layer.
At this point,
the output volume width and
height are reduced
by a factor of two,
while the depth is
expanded to 64.
We can separate
the VGG feature extractor
into subsections,
where each subsection ends
with a pooling layer.
The first subsection
is called the
Conv1 subsection of
the VGG extractor.
We then proceed to pass
the output volume
through the rest of
the five subsections to arrive at
our final output volume
of shape M over 32,
N over 32, and 512.
As an example, if we have a
1,240 by 960 by
3 image as our input,
our final output volume shape
will be 40 by 30 by 512.
We will be using
this output volume to
generate our final detections.
The next step to describe
in our neural
network architecture
is the concept of prior boxes.
Also called anchor boxes.
To generate 2D bounding boxes,
we usually do not
start from scratch and
estimate the corners
of the bounding box
without any prior.
We assume that we do have
a prior on where the boxes
are in image space and how
large these boxes should be.
These priors are called
anchor boxes and are manually
defined over the whole image
usually on an
equally-spaced grid.
Let's assume that we
have a set of anchors
close to our ground-truth boxes.
During training,
the network learns
to take each of these anchors and
tries to move it as
close as possible
to the ground truth bounding
box in both the centroid
location and box dimensions.
This is termed residual learning
and it takes advantage
of the notion that it is
easier to nudge and existing
box a small amount to improve
it rather than to search
the entire image for
possible object locations.
In practice, residual learning
has proven to provide
much better results
than attempting
to directly estimate bounding
boxes without any prior.
Many different methods have been
proposed in the literature
on how to use
the anchor bounding boxes
to generate the final prediction.
Usually, the anchors interact
with the feature map
to generate fixed sized feature
vectors for every anchor.
We'll explain one of
the first methods
proposed for this interaction by
Microsoft Research in
their architecture Faster R-CNN.
However, keep in mind
that this is not
the only way to perform
such an interaction.
The Faster R-CNN interaction
method is quite simple.
For every pixel in
the feature map,
we associate k anchor boxes.
We then perform a
three by three by D
star convolution operation
on that pixels neighborhood.
This results in a one by one by D
star feature vector
for that pixel.
We use this one by one by
D star feature vector as
the feature vector of every one
of the k anchors associated
with that pixel.
We then proceed to feed
the extracted feature vector
to the output layers
in the neural network.
The output layers of
a 2D object detector
usually comprise
of a regression head and
a classification head.
The regression head
usually includes
multiple fully-connected
hidden layers
with a linear output layer.
The regressed output is typically
a vector of residuals that need
to be added to
the anchor that hand
to get the ground truth
bounding box.
Another method to
update the dimension
of the anchors is to
regress a residual
from the center of the anchor
to the center of the ground truth
bounding box in addition
to two scale factors
that correct the
ground truth bounding
box width and height when
multiplied with
an anchor's width and height.
The classification head
is also comprised
of multiple fully-connected
hidden layers,
but with a final
softmax output layer.
The softmax output is
a vector with
a single score per class.
The highest score usually
defines the class of
the anchor at hand.
You might note that based on
what we described so far,
we will end up with
k bounding boxes
per pixel of
the output feature map.
Even if we consider boxes with
high classification score
for all classes of interest,
we still will have
many redundant detections
in the image.
During average
precision computation,
we only consider one
detection per ground
truth bounding box.
Any redundant detections are
considered false positives and
results in lower precision and
thus a lower average
precision overall.
Recall, we're aiming
for perfect detection,
which means we want
an output of one box per
object in the image.
So, we will need to do
something to eliminate
the many redundant detections
produced by our network.
In fact, this is
only an issue of inference
and it turns out to be beneficial
to drive the network to output
the best possible residuals
for every anchor during training.
Before going deeper
into this issue,
let's summarize what you
learned this lesson.
First, you learned that
convolutional neural networks
can be used to solve
the 2D object detection
problem and study
the details of the VGG feature
extractor architecture.
Second, you learned how
to use anchor boxes
as object location priors and
estimate the bounding
box residuals
to output the final
object locations.
In the next lesson,
we'll describe how to train
2D object detectors using
classification and
regression loss functions.
For that, we will use most
of the k output boxes.
We'll then return to
the challenge of outputting
a single bounding box per object
and introduce the concept
of non-maximum suppression
to solve it. See you then.